# phac-nml/speciesabundance: Output

## Introduction

This document describes the output produced by the pipeline.

The directories listed below will be created in the results directory after the pipeline has finished. All paths are relative to the top-level results directory.

- `fastp`
- `adjust`
- `bracken`
- `bracken2krona`
- `csvtk`
- `kraken2`
- `krona`
- `pipeline_info`
- `top`

The IRIDA Next-compliant JSON output file will be named `iridanext.output.json.gz` and will be written to the top-level of the results directory. This file is compressed using GZIP and conforms to the [IRIDA Next JSON output specifications](https://github.com/phac-nml/pipeline-standards#42-irida-next-json).

## Pipeline overview

The pipeline is built using [Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/) and processes data using the following steps:

- [Trimming and Quality Assessment](#trimming-and-quality-assessment) - Performs preprocessing on high-throughput sequencing data, offering quality control, adapter trimming, and filtering.
- [Taxonomic Classification](#taxonomic-classification) - Classifies taxa in metagenomic sequencing reads based on k-mer matches to a reference genome database.
- [Abundance Estimation](#abundance-estimation) - Estimates taxon abundance in metagenomic samples using read-specific probabilities.
  - The taxon abundances are adjusted to include unclassified reads.
  - Taxon abundances across all taxonomic units integrates total reads in each sample, a process recalibrated by the Bracken estimation algorithm.
- [Hierarchial Data Visulization](#hierarchial-data-visulization) - Produces radial sunburst visualizations to depict estimated species abundance data.
- [IRIDA Next Output](#irida-next-output) - Generates a JSON output file that is compliant with IRIDA Next.
- [Pipeline information](#pipeline-information) - Report metrics generated during the workflow execution.

### Trimming and Quality Assessment

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `fastp/`
  - Trimmed fastq reads and quality assessment files:
    - `sampleID_{R1/R2}_trimmed.fastq.gz`
    - `sampleID.fastp.json`
    - `sampleID.gastp.html`

</details>

### Taxonomic Classification

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `kraken2/`
  - Classification files:
    - `sampleID_kraken2_output.tsv.gz`
    - `sampleID_kraken2_report.txt`

</details>

### Abundance Estimation

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `bracken/`
  - Taxonomic Abundance Estimations:
    - `sampleID_S_bracken_abundance_unsorted.tsv`
    - `sampleID_S_bracken.txt`
- `adjust/`
  - Taxonomic abundances/proportions adjusted for unclassified reads and recalibrated total reads:
    - `sampleID_S_bracken_abundance.csv`
    - `sampleID_S_adjusted_report.txt`

</details>

### Hierarchial Data Visulization

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `krona/`
  - Adjusted Abundance Estimation SunBurst Chart:
    - `sampleID.krona.html`

</details>

### IRIDA Next Output

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `/`
  - IRIDA Next-compliant JSON output:
    - `iridanext.output.json.gz`

</details>

### Pipeline information

<details markdown="1">
<summary>Output files</summary>

- `pipeline_info/`
  - Reports generated by Nextflow: `execution_report.html`, `execution_timeline.html`, `execution_trace.txt` and `pipeline_dag.dot`/`pipeline_dag.svg`.
  - Reports generated by the pipeline: `pipeline_report.html`, `pipeline_report.txt` and `software_versions.yml`. The `pipeline_report*` files will only be present if the `--email` / `--email_on_fail` parameter's are used when running the pipeline.
  - Parameters used by the pipeline run: `params.json`.

</details>

[Nextflow](https://www.nextflow.io/docs/latest/tracing.html) provides excellent functionality for generating various reports relevant to the running and execution of the pipeline. This will allow you to troubleshoot errors with the running of the pipeline, and also provide you with other information such as launch commands, run times and resource usage.
